---
layout: posts
title:  "Interesting applications of p-adic numbers"
date:   2023-02-18
categories: jekyll update
tags: math
---

In this post, we will see some *interesting* applications of $p$-adic numbers.
We will assume that readers are familiar with $p$-adic numbers and their basic properties.

## Monsky's theorem

One of my favorite application of $p$-adic numbers is the following theorem:

> **Theorem (Monsky).** Assume that a unit square is partitioned by triangles of equal area.
> Then the number of triangles is even.

It does not seem to be related to $p$-adic numbers at all.
However, as far as I know, the only known proof (by Monsky) uses $2$-adic norm as follows.

*Proof.*
We use the following lemma (from [Pete L. Clark's answer on MO](https://mathoverflow.net/a/141466/95471)):

> **Lemma.** Let $(F, \|\cdot\|)$ be a normed field. Then we can extend the norm to any finitely generated field over $F$.

*Proof of Lemma.*
It is enough to show for an extension generated by single element, i.e. $K =F(t)$ for some $t$.
When $t$ is algebraic, we can extend the norm as

$$
|\alpha|_K := |N_{K/F}(\alpha)|_{F}^{1/[K:F]}
$$

where $N\_{K/F}(\alpha)$ is defined as a determinant of the multiplication map $m_{\alpha}: K \to K, x \mapsto \alpha x$.

When $t$ is trascendental, we first endow $F[t]$ with *Gauss norm*

$$
|a_n t^n + a_{n-1} t^{n-1} + \cdots + a_0| = \max_i |a_i|
$$

and extend to $K = F(t)$ by multiplicativity. $\square$


Now let $K$ be a field obtained by adjoining all the $x$ and $y$-coordinates of verticies of triangles to $\mathbb{Q}$.
By Lemma, we can extend $2$-adic norm on $\mathbb{Q}$ to $K$, denote as $|\cdot|\_2$.
We will color the vertices of triangles as follows: a point $(x, y)$ red if $|x|\_2 < 1, |y|\_2 < 1$, color it blue if $|x|\_2 \leq |y|\_2$ and $|y|\_2\geq 1$, and color it green if $|x|\_2> |y|\_2$ and $|x|\_2\geq 1$. 
Then each edge can only contain at most two colors. By Sperner's lemma, we can find a complete triangle where all the vertices have different colors. 
Let $(x_{r}, y_{r}), (x_{b}, y_{b}), (x_{g}, y_{g})$ be the coordinates of the complete triangle with red, blue, and green colors. 
The area $A$ of the triangle is the absolute value of 

$$
\frac{(x_g - x_r)(y_b - y_r) - (x_b - x_r)(y_g - y_r)}{2}.
$$

By definition of the coloring, we have 

$$
\begin{align*}
|(x_b - x_r)&(y_g - y_r)|_2 = |x_{b}y_{g}|_2 \geq 1,  \\
|x_{b}|_2 &\geq \max\{ |y_{b}|_2, |y_{r}|_2\}, \\
|y_{g}|_2 &> \max\{|x_{g}|_2, |x_{r}|_2\}
\end{align*}
$$

so we have

$$
|A|_2 = |1/2|_2 |x_b|_2 |y_g|_2 \geq 2.
$$

By the way, the area is $A = 1/n$, so we get $|n|_2 \leq 1/2$ and $n$ is even. 
$\square$


Note that the original proof uses Axiom of Choice to impose $2$-adic norm on $\mathbb{C}$ via $\mathbb{C} \simeq \mathbb{C}\_2$.
However, as we did above, we don't need AC to prove the theorem - imposing $2$-adic valuation on $K$ is enough.

## Skolem-Mahler-Lech theorem

Consider a sequence $\{a_n\}$ defined by

$$
a_0 = a_1 = 1, \quad a_{n+2} = a_{n+1} - a_{n}.
$$

If you compute first few terms of $a_n$, you will find that the sequence is periodic as

$$
1, 1, 0, -1, -1, 0, 1, 1, 0, -1,-1, 0, \dots
$$

and the zero set of $a_n$ (set of $n$ with $a_n = 0$) is $\{n:n\equiv 2\,\mathrm{mod}\,3\}$.

Consider another sequence $\{b_n\}$ given as

$$
b_n = 2b_{n-1} - 4b_{n-2} + 8b_{n-3}
$$

with $b_0 = b_1 = 1$ and $b_2 = -2$.
Then one can show that $b_n = 0$ if and only if $n\equiv 3\,(\mathrm{mod}\, 4)$.
In both cases, the zero set of sequence are periodic.
Skolem-Mahler-Lech theorem tells us that this is true in general:

> **Theorem (Skolem-Mahler-Lech).** The zero set of a linear recurrence sequence is eventually periodic.

In this post, we will only consider *integer* sequences, which was the scope of the original result by Skolem (it is generalized further by Mahler and Lech for algebraic numbers and characteristic 0 fields).
Surprisingly, all the known proofs uses $p$-adic integers.
Here we will provide a proof by Hansel, which is stolen from [Terrence Tao's blog post](https://terrytao.wordpress.com/2007/05/25/open-question-effective-skolem-mahler-lech-theorem/).

*Proof.* Let $\{x_n\}$ be an integer sequence defined recursively as $x_n = a_1 x_{n-1} + \cdots + a_{d} x_{n-d}$ with $a_i \in \mathbb{Z}$.
We can assume that $a_d \neq 0$.
Then

$$
\begin{pmatrix} x_{n+1} \\ x_{n+2} \\ \vdots \\ x_{n+d}\end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} 0 & 1 & 0 & \cdots & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & \cdots & 0 \\ \vdots & \vdots & \vdots & \ddots & \vdots \\ a_{d} & a_{d-1} & a_{d-2} & \cdots & a_{1} \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} x_n \\ x_{n+1} \\ \vdots \\ x_{n+d-1}\end{pmatrix}
$$

and this let us to write $x_n$ as 

$$
x_n = \langle A^n v, w\rangle
$$

for some $A \in \mathrm{GL}\_{d}(\mathbb{Z})$ and $v, w\in \mathbb{Z}^d$
(we can take $A$ as the above $d\times d$ matrix, $v = (x_0, x_1, \dots, x_{d-1})^{\intercal}$ and $w = (1, 0, \dots, 0)^{\intercal}$).
Choose a prime $p> 2$ that does not divide $\det(A)$, so that $A$ is also invertible modulo $p$.
Then we can find $m \geq 1$ such that $A^m \equiv I \,(\mathrm{mod}\,p)$ (take $m$ to be the order of $A$ in $\mathrm{GL}\_n(\mathbb{F}\_p)$).

Our claim is that $m$ is the eventual period of the zero set.
More precisely, for each $r = 0, 1, \dots, m-1$, we will prove that 

$$
\{n \geq 0: x_{mn + r} = 0\}
$$

is either finite or all $\mathbb{Z}\_{\geq 0}$.
Assume that it is infinite.
Let $A^m = I + pB$ with $B \in M\_{d \times d}(\mathbb{Z})$ and put 

$$
P(n) := x_{mn + r} = \langle A^{mn+r}v, w \rangle = \langle (I+pB)^n A^r v, w \rangle
$$

which is a function $P: \mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z}$ that is zero for infinitely many $n$ by assumption.
Since $\|(I+pB)^{p^m} - I\|\_p \to 0$ as $m \to \infty$ (where $\|M\|\_p := \sup_{i, j} |m_{i, j}|\_p$ for $M = (m_{i, j})$), the function can be extended as $P: \mathbb{Z}\_p \to \mathbb{Z}\_p$.
Write $P(n)$ as a formal power series

$$
P(n) = \sum_{j=0}^{\infty} p^j P_j(n).
$$

The binomial expansion of $(I+pB)^n$ is

$$
(I+pB)^n = \sum_{k \geq 0}  \binom{n}{k} (pB)^k = \sum_{\geq 0} n(n-1)\cdots (n-k+1) \frac{p^k}{k!} B^k.
$$

Now we have

$$
\begin{align*}
v_p\left(\frac{p^k}{k!}\right) &= k - v_p(k!) = k - \left(\left\lfloor \frac{k}{p} \right\rfloor + \left\lfloor \frac{k}{p^2}\right\rfloor + \cdots \right) \\
&> k - \left(\frac{k}{p} + \frac{k}{p^2} + \cdots\right) = \left(\frac{p-2}{p-1}\right) k  \xrightarrow{k\to\infty} \infty
\end{align*}
$$

(note that we assumed $p> 2$).
This implies that each of $P_j$ can be build using only finitely many of the terms in the binomial expansion.
Hence $P: \mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z}$ extends continuously to a function $P:\mathbb{Z}\_p \to \mathbb{Z}\_p$ such that each $n\mapsto P(n) \,(\mathrm{mod}\,p^j)$ is a polynomial in $n$ for all $j$.
In other words, it is a uniform limit of polynomials.


Now, we will show that $P$ is identically zero.
If $n_0$ is a zero of $P$, then we can factor $P(n)$ as

$$
P(n) = (n - n_0)Q(n) = (n - n_0) (Q_0(n) + pQ_1(n) + p^2 Q_2(n) + \cdots)
$$

for some continuous $Q: \mathbb{Z}\_p \to \mathbb{Z}\_p$.
Then $P_0(n) = (n - n_0)Q_0(n)$, i.e. $n_0$ is also a zero of the constant term $P_0(n)$ *which is a polynomial*.
Since $P$ has infinitely many zeros, $P_0$ should vanish and $P(n)$ is divisible by $p$.
By repeating the same argument, $P$ should be divisible by arbitrary power of $p$, which implies $P = 0$.
This concludes the proof.
$\square$

Note that the theorem is false in characteristic $p$: consider the sequence $\{a_n\}$ in $\mathbb{F}_p(x)$ defined as

$$
a_n = (2x+2)a_{n-1} - (x^2 + 3x + 1)a_{n-2} + (x^2 + x)a_{n-3}.
$$

with initial conditions $a_0 = -1, a_1 = 0, a_2 = 2x^2$.
This sequence is nothing but 

$$
a_n = (x+1)^n - x^n - 1,
$$

and we have $a_{p^k} = 0$ for all $k\geq 0$, which can't be a finite union of arithmetic progressions.
Harm Derksen [proved](https://arxiv.org/abs/math/0510583) that this is essentially the only way where the theorem could fail in positive characteristic.



## $\pi$ and $e$ are transcendental

(This section follows [Matt Baker's blog post](https://mattbaker.blog/2015/03/20/a-p-adic-proof-that-pi-is-transcendental/).)
Another striking application of $p$-adic numbers is that $\pi$ and $e$ (and many more) are trancendental.
More generally, [Bezvin and Robba](https://www.jstor.org/stable/1971488) proposed an alternative proof of the following Lindemann-Weierstrass theorem:

> **Theorem (Lindemann-Weierstras).** Let $\alpha_1, \dots, \alpha_n$ be distinct algebraic numbers. Then $e^{\alpha_1}, \dots, e^{\alpha_n}$ are linearly independent over $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}$.

As a corollary, if $\alpha$ is an algebraic number, then $e^\alpha$ is trancendental.
From this, trancendentality of $\pi$ and $e$ directly follows ($e^{\pi i} = -1$ and $e^1 = e$).
Bezvin and Robba's first show that the theorem is equivalent to the following statement:[^1]

> **Theorem (Bezvin-Robba).** Let $\mathcal{F}\_{\mathbb{Q}} = \frac{1}{x} \mathbb{Q}[[\frac{1}{x}]]$ be a ring of formal power series vanish at infinity. Define $\mathcal{D}: \mathcal{F}\_{\mathbb{Q}} \to \mathcal{F}\_{\mathbb{Q}}$ be a differential operator defined as $\mathcal{D}(v):= v + v'$. If $v \in \mathcal{F}\_{\mathbb{Q}}$ is analytic at infinity and $\mathcal{D}(v)$ is a rational function, then $v$ is also rational.

Although Bezvin and Robba showed that two statements (theorems) are equivalent, I will only introduce the proof of (B-R $\Rightarrow$ L-W), which is enough for our purpose.
See the above blog post for the proof of the other direction.

*Proof (B-R $\Rightarrow$ L-W).* 
Assume that L-W theorem is false, so that there exists distinct algebraic numbers $\alpha_1, \dots, \alpha_n$ and nonzero algebraic numbers $\beta_1, \dots, \beta_n$ such that $\beta_1 e^{\alpha_1} + \cdots + \beta_{n} e^{\alpha_{n}} = 0$.
Let $f(z) = \sum_{i=1}^{n} \beta_{n} e^{\alpha_{n} z}$, so that $f(1) = 0$ by assumption.
By replacing $f(z)$ with the product of its Galois conjugates $\sum_{i=1}^{n} \sigma(\beta_i) e^{\sigma(\alpha_i)z}$, we can assume that the power series expansion of $f(z)$ has $\mathbb{Q}$-coefficients.
Now, consider the [Laplace transform](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/LaplaceTransform.html) of $f$, which is $\mathcal{L}(f) = \sum_{i=1}^{n} \frac{\beta_i}{1 - \alpha_i z}$.
Since $f(1) = 0$ and $\alpha_i$ are distinct, we have $n\geq 2$ and at least one $\alpha_i$ should be nonzero, so $f(z)$ has at least one simple pole.
Now we need a following lemma, which we will use without proof:

> **Lemma.** 
> $f(z) \in \mathbb{C}[[z]]$ defines an entire function of exponential growth (i.e. $|f(z)| \leq C_1 e^{C_2|z|}$ for some constants $C_1, C_2$) if and only if $\mathcal{L}(f)$ is analytic at infinity.

Let $g(z) := \frac{f(z)}{z-1}$, which is analytic by the assumption $f(1) = 0$.
Hence, by the above Lemma, $v:=\mathcal{L}(g) \in \frac{1}{x} \mathbb{C}[[\frac{1}{x}]]$ is analytic at infinity.
By the way, direct computation shows that $\mathcal{L}(f) = \mathcal{D}(v)$, hence it has a simple pole.
On the other hand, one can show that $\mathcal{D}(v)$ cannot have a simple pole if $v$ is a rational function, which leads to a contradiction. $\square$

Now our goal is reduced to the above rationality statement.
There are many related theorems, starting from the following observation by Borel: if $f(z) = \sum_{n\geq 0} a_n z^n \in \mathbb{Z}[[x]]$ defines an analytic function on a closed disc of radius $R > 1$ centered at $0$ in $\mathbb{C}$, then $f(z)$ is a polynomial.
This easily follows from Cauchy's integral formula: $|a_n| \leq \frac{M}{2\pi R^{n+1}}$ for $M = \sup_{|z| \leq R} |f(z)|$, and taking $n\to\infty$ shows that $a_n =0$ for sufficiently large $n$.
Borel generalized this to the following theorem:

> **Theorem (Borel)** If $f(z) = \sum_{n\geq 0} a_n z^n \in \mathbb{Z}[[x]]$ defines a meromorphic function on a closed disc of radius $R > 1$ centered at $0$ in $\mathbb{C}$, then $f(z)$ is a rational function.

The proof of Borel's theorem uses Kronecker's characterization of rational functions via Kronecker-Hankel determinant (see Lemma 10 of [this](https://terrytao.wordpress.com/2014/05/13/dworks-proof-of-rationality-of-the-zeta-function-over-finite-fields/)).
Borel's theorem is generalized in several directions, including Dwork's $p$-adic analogue (which is used for the proof of rationality of zeta functions for curves over finite fields: see [this](https://terrytao.wordpress.com/2014/05/13/dworks-proof-of-rationality-of-the-zeta-function-over-finite-fields/) again).
For our purpose, we will use the following criterion by Bertrandias:

> **Theorem (Bertrandias).** Let $g(z) = \sum_{n\geq 0} \frac{a_n}{z^{n+1}} \in \mathcal{F}_{\mathbb{Q}}$.
Let $S$ be a finite set of places, containing the infinite places, such that
>
> (B1) For $p \not \in S$, $|a\_n|\_p \leq 1$ for all $n\geq 0$.
> 
> (B2) For $p \in S$, $g(z)$ extends to a meromorphic function on the complement of a bounded set $K_v \subset \mathbb{C}\_v$ (which is assumed to be a finite union of discs if $v$ is non-archimedean) and $\prod_{v\in S} \delta_{\infty}(K_v) < 1$.
>
> Then $g(z)$ is a rational function.

Here $\delta_\infty$ is a *transfinite diameter* defined as

$$
\delta_{\infty}(A) := \lim_{N\to\infty} \delta_{N}(A), \quad \delta_{N}(A):= \sup_{z_1, \dots, z_N \in A} \left(\prod_{i \neq j} |z_i - z_j|\right)^{\frac{1}{N(N-1)}}
$$

for any bounded set $A$ of a normed space.
The proof of Bertrandias' criterion is similar to that of Borel's and Dwork's theorem.

Now let's prove Bezvin-Robba's theorem using Bertrandias' rationality criterion.

*Proof (Bezvin-Robba).*
Let $\omega(x) = \mathcal{D}(v)(x) = v(x) + v'(x)$, which is a rational function by assumption.
Expand $\omega(x)$ a partial fraction as follows:

$$
\omega(x) = \sum_{i, j} \frac{c_{i, j}}{(x - \gamma_i)^j}
$$

where $\gamma_1, \dots, \gamma_m$ are distinct algebraic numbers.
By using the formal inverse $\mathcal{D}^{-1} = (1 + \frac{d}{dx})^{-1} = \sum_{k \geq 0} (-1)^{k} \frac{d^k}{dx^k}$, $v$ has the following partial fraction expansion

$$
v(x) = \sum_{i, j} c_{i, j}\sum_{k \geq 0} \binom{k+j-1}{j-1} \frac{k!}{(x - \gamma_i)^{k+j}}.
$$

Now let $S_1$ be a set of places of $\mathbb{Q}$ containing archimedean place such that for $p \not \in S_1$, 

1) $|c_{i, j}|_p = 1 = |\gamma_j|_p$ whenever they are nonzero,

2) $|\gamma_i - \gamma_j|_p = 1$ for all $i\neq j$.

Then one can show that the coefficients of the expansion $v(x) = \sum_{n \geq 0} \frac{a_n}{x^{n+1}}$ are $p$-adic integers for all $p \not \in S_1$ (consider Laurent series expansion of $1/(x-\gamma_i)^{k+j}$ near $x = 0$).
Hence the condition (B1) is satisfied for any $S$ containing $S_1$.

For (B2), note that $v(x)$ converges outside of a disc $K_p \subset \mathbb{C}\_p$ of some positive radius $R_p$ for all $p \in S_1$.
For $p \not \in S_1$, $v(x)$ converges in the complement of $K_p$ that is a union of discs $D_i$ centered at $\gamma_i$'s, and we can take radii of discs as $p^{-1/(p-1)}$ since the radius of convergence of $\sum_{k\geq 0} k! x^k$ is $p^{1/(p-1)}$.
Since the radius of convergence is smaller than 1, the discs are disjoint by second assumption on $S_1$.
Now, the transfinite diameter of $K_p$ becomes:

> *Lemma.* We have
> 
> $$
> \delta_{\infty}(K_p) = \delta_{\infty}\left(\bigcup_{i=1}^{m} D_i\right) = p^{-\frac{1}{m(p-1)}}.
> $$

Let's postpone the proof of the lemma for a moment.
Since $\sum_{p} \frac{\log p}{p}$ diverges, the infinite product $\prod_{p\not \in S_{1}} \delta_{\infty}(K_p)$ diverges to zero, hence there exists a finite set $S$ containing $S_1$ such that $\prod_{p \not \in S} \delta_{\infty}(K_p) < 1$, and such a choice of $S$ satisfies both (B1) and (B2).
Thus $v(x)$ is a rational function. $\square$


*Proof of Lemma.* 
First, note that if $z_i$ and $z_j$ are not in the same disk, then the triangle inequality gives $|z_i - z_j| \leq \max\{|z_i - \gamma_i|, |\gamma_i - \gamma_j|, |\gamma_j - z_j|\}$, and this implies $|z_i - z_j| = 1$ since $|\gamma_i - \gamma_j| = 1$ and $|z_i - \gamma_i|, |z_j - \gamma_j| \leq p^{-1/(p-1)} < 1$.
If $z_i$ and $z_j$ lies in the same disk, then $|z_i - z_j| \leq \max\{|z_i - \gamma_i|, |\gamma_i - z_j|\} \leq p^{-1/(p-1)}$.
Now, let $z_1, \dots, z_N$ be points in $K_p$, and each $D_i$ contains $k_i$ points of them with $k_1 + \cdots + k_m = N$.
Then

$$
\begin{align*}
\delta_N(K_p) &\leq (p^{-\frac{1}{p-1}})^{\left(\frac{k_1(k_1 -1)}{2} + \cdots + \frac{k_m(k_m -1)}{2}\right) \frac{2}{N(N-1)}} \\
&= (p^{-\frac{1}{p-1}})^{(k_1^2 + \cdots + k_m^2 - N)\cdot \frac{1}{N(N-1)}} \\
&\leq (p^{-\frac{1}{p-1}})^{\left(\frac{N^2}{m} - N\right)\frac{1}{N(N-1)}} 
\end{align*}
$$

where the second inequality follows from $k_1^2 +\cdots + k_m^2 \geq \frac{N^2}{m}$ (Cauchy-Schwartz).
Taking the limit $N\to\infty$ gives $\delta\_{\infty}(K_p) \leq p^{-\frac{1}{m(p-1)}}$.

For the other direction, assume that $N = mk$ is a multiple of $m$.
Now we choose $k$ points $z_{i, 1}, \dots, z_{i, k}$ in each disk $D_i$ as $z_{i, j} = \gamma_i + p^{-1/(p-1)} \zeta_M^j$, where $M$ is an integer coprime to $p$ and $\zeta_M \in \mathbb{C}\_p$ is $M$-th root of unity.
Then one can show that $|z_{i, j} - z_{i, j'}| = p^{-1/(p-1)}$ for any $j \neq j'$, and this gives a lower bound

$$
\delta_{mk}(K_p) \geq (p^{-\frac{1}{p-1}})^{\frac{mk(k-1)}{2} \frac{2}{N(N-1)}} = (p^{-\frac{1}{p-1}})^{\frac{N/m - 1}{N-1}}
$$

where the RHS converges to $p^{-1/(m(p-1))}$ as $N\to\infty$.
This gives $\delta_\infty(K_p) \geq p^{-1/(m(p-1))}$ and completes the proof. $\square$


## Other applications

Here are some list of other interesting applications of $p$-adic numbers:

* Structure of $(\mathbb{Z}/p^n\mathbb{Z})^\times$. Use $p$-adic exponential and logarithm to show that they are cyclic (for odd $p$ - when $p=2$ then $(\mathbb{Z}/2^k\mathbb{Z})^\times$ it is a product of two cyclic groups). See [this note](https://github.com/seewoo5/math-notes/blob/main/number-theory/unit_group_of_Zmodpn/Zmodpnx.pdf).
* Galois group of certain polynomials. Coleman showed that the Galois group of a splitting field of truncated exponential polynomial $f_n(x) = \sum_{k=0}^{n} \frac{x^k}{k!}$ is $S_n$ if $4\nmid n$ and $A_n$ otherwise, using Newton polygons.
See [this blog post by Baker](https://mattbaker.blog/2014/05/02/newton-polygons-and-galois-groups/).
* Complex dynamics. See [this MO answer](https://mathoverflow.net/a/84334/95471) by Silverman and also [the original paper](https://people.math.harvard.edu/~demarco/preperiodic.pdf) by Baker-DeMarco. Although the statement is about dynamics over complex numbers, proof uses equidistribution theorem on non-archimedean Berkovich spaces.
* Cryptanalysis. See [Klapper and Goresky's paper](https://www.math.ias.edu/~goresky/pdf/crypt95.pdf) on attacking stream ciphers using 2-adic numbers.


[^1] As it mentioned in Matt Baker's blog post, this statement is slightly different from the original one from Bezvin-Robba, which are essentially the same via simple transformation.