---
layout: posts
title:  "PhDone"
date:   2026-05-22
categories: jekyll update
tags: math
---

I got my PhD. I submitted my thesis, commencement is done, and I packed my stuff to go back to Korea.
This post is my PhD (or pre-PhD) diary.
I don't know why I'm writing this — I feel like I have to.

## (pre-)First year

So I started my PhD in Fall 2018. Now it is Spring 2026, and you'll see soon why it took me so long (you can guess if you're Korean).
Until my third year, I hadn't thought about studying abroad. The major event that changed my mind was the [Fields Undergraduate Summer Research Program](https://www.fields.utoronto.ca/generalinfo/Fields-Undergraduate-Summer-Research-Program), which is a summer REU at the Fields Institute in Toronto. I attended it when I was a senior, and it made me realize that I might be better off if I studied abroad and met more people in the world.
But it was a bit late to apply for PhD programs, so I decided to do a master's first at POSTECH.
I applied to 15 schools (I wanted to apply to more, around 30, but my English was poor and so was my TOEFL score) and got into Berkeley. The admission email ended up in my spam folder and I found it a week after it arrived (so anyone applying to PhD programs or anything else — *please check your spam folder*).

I really enjoyed my first year. I took some courses and learned a lot (though I didn't do so well — I got two B's).
My favorite class was David Nadler's Lie Groups course, where he explained the subject in a very intuitive and geometric way. The exams were memorable too; they were all short-answer questions, and one of them gave us a list of 10 Lie groups and asked us to group them by which ones share the same Lie algebra (you can find it [here](https://math.berkeley.edu/~nadler/2018.math261a.midterm2.pdf)).
But more importantly, all my cohort-mates were really kind and very passionate about mathematics. Sometimes we would talk about math endlessly, and I was really happy about that. Also, Berkeley is close to San Francisco, so I could attend a lot of concerts, which was good for my mental health.
I once even went to a Muse concert with a bunch of my cohorts.

## Alternative Military Service, Covid, etc

Unfortunately, I had to go back to Korea for alternative military service in 2019.
Since I didn't want to think about the qualifying exam after coming back 3 years later, I took it at the end of my first year. Berkeley's QE is an oral exam where students choose 3 topics (two major and one minor), and I chose Automorphic Forms, Number Theory, and Complex Analysis (Minor). I passed the exam, although I think I didn't do so well in Automorphic Forms. You can find my QE syllabus and questions [here](https://seewoo5.github.io/assets/Qual_report.pdf).

After I came back to Korea, I started looking for a company to work at. For context, I (like many other people) had two choices: go into active military service (1.5 years), or work at a government-approved company for alternative military service (3 years).
The first is much shorter, but people often prefer the second because they can do something more interesting.
I took the second path and eventually got a job at [Riiid](https://corp.socra.ai/), an ed-tech company that uses AI to help students learn better (the company has since changed its name for several reasons that I don't know). I worked there for almost two years, developing deep learning models for student performance prediction (usually called "knowledge tracing" in the literature) and recommendation systems.
It was actually my first time learning about deep learning, and I picked up a lot. It was also the era when BERT, GPT-2, Reformer, and others came out, and people were amazed.
At the time, it was even possible to search all papers accepted to ICML that used transformers and read them all — at least the abstracts, [which I did](https://seewoo5.tistory.com/25) — but now that simply doesn't make sense because every paper uses transformers.
I also learned about reinforcement learning and [Adam Wagner's work](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.14516) on finding counterexamples to conjectures in graph theory using RL, which was the first paper I read on "AI for Mathematics."

I then moved to another company, [CryptoLab](https://www.cryptolab.co.kr/en/home/). It is a very different kind of company, working on homomorphic encryption and applying it to private machine learning.
I decided to move there because it seemed more mathematical, especially given how homomorphic encryption (or lattice-based cryptography) is related to number theory.
Eventually, I worked on developing a Python library on top of our homomorphic encryption library (called HEAAN, based on the CKKS scheme), which turned out to be mostly algorithm design work.
In short, you have a limited set of operations on vectors of fixed length (component-wise addition and multiplication, and rotation), and you want to implement ML algorithms using as few operations as possible (especially multiplications and rotations).
In some sense, I could do this without knowing much about the CKKS scheme itself, and luckily I was able to write [a paper](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/lee23m/lee23m.pdf) based on the work.

All of this happened from 2019 to 2022, which was also when the Covid-19 pandemic started.
Sometimes I had to work from home, and it was not much fun since I couldn't meet my colleagues in person.
But anyway, things got better and 3 years passed.

## Back to Berkeley, Strike, Thesis

I came back to Berkeley in Fall 2022.
Now all my cohorts were in their 5th year, and I was the only one in my 2nd year.
The department was full of strangers and honestly it was pretty lonely at first. 
Since I didn't take any courses as others after coming back, I only attended seminars and mostly talked to the undergrads in my discussion sections.
Since it was pre-ChatGPT, many students come to the sections and asked a lot of questions, and I really enjoyed talking to them.
BUT! there was a strike for the semsester, where graduate students and postdocs went on strike for better pay and working conditions. It lasted for about two months, and ended up with (much better) pay and a lot of other benefits for the students, but I was not able to finish my teaching and talk to the students.
However, I faced some of them (to be precise, three of them) quite a lot for the remaining years, which was fun.
Also my friends found [this](https://www.reddit.com/r/berkeley/comments/11pxd1g/who_are_the_math_gsis_that_are_currently_carrying/) and sent it to me, which might be the best achievement of my graduate student life.

I also had to decide on a thesis topic.
[My advisor](https://math.berkeley.edu/~swshin/) suggested me to read Getz-Hahn's GTM 300 book on automorphic forms and representations and try to find something interesting from it, so I did and found one topic: covering groups and relative trace formula (the book itself has a subtitle "with a view toward Trace Formulae", and actually it is toward *Relative* Trace Formulae).


## Sphere packing, informally

## Sphere packing, formally

## What's next

During the summer, I'll be in Korea except for one week (when I go to ICARM for a workshop).
There are a lot of workshops and conferences on AI for mathematics coming up, and I'll be attending several.

In Fall, I'll be a postdoc at EPFL, working with Maryna Viazovska and Viktor Kuncak.
I don't know yet what I'll be working on.
But I'll do math, write Lean, and explore AI, among other things.
I hope it will be fun.