---
layout: posts
title:  "Early-stage mathematician in the age of AI"
date:   2026-03-02
categories: jekyll update
tags: math machine-learning
---

This is an essay about the role (or act) of **early-stage** mathematicians in the age of AI. It is motivated by several articles, including [Daniel Litt's blog](https://www.daniellitt.com/blog/2026/2/20/mathematics-in-the-library-of-babel), [Jeremy Avigad's essay](https://www.andrew.cmu.edu/user/avigad/Papers/mathematicians.pdf), [Leo de Moura's blog](https://leodemoura.github.io/blog/2026/02/18/proof-assistants-in-the-age-of-ai.html).
In particular, I believe that the way professional mathematicians looking/using AI could be different from that from early-stage mathematicians, which was the main motivation for this post.

TL;DR: Don't worry (if you are reading this in March, 2026. If you are reading this later, maybe the answer got updated).

Disclaimer: I'm a random guy doing PhD (and graduating this year, May of 2026). Do some number theory, some AI stuff, some formalization stuff. I'm not claiming that I'm expert of any of these or qualified to write this - if you are non-early-stage mathematician or need advice from actual experts, read the above great posts and probably this post won't tell you any new insights. But I was (over)thinking about the topic recently and want to spit out some of them. If you are a graduate student and want hear some stories and thoughts from a random guy on the internet, this is for you. There's an [old blog post](https://seewoo5.github.io/jekyll/update/2025/08/11/ai-and-math.html) on a similar topic, but this is more about recent thoughts and experiences.

## Informal mathematics

Maybe, you have seen a lot of news on "AI for mathematics", even you don't work on this area. There are some works using ChatGPT to prove some new theorems or improve known theorems, and there are some works using Gemini (or Aletheia - a smarter version of it in a rough sense). If you are interested, check out [this list of related works](https://seewoo5.github.io/awesome-ai-for-math/) maintained by myself (in particular, the ones with `LLM` tags).

The point is, these LLMs are getting smarter, and the current "Pro" or "Deep Thinking" versions are smart enough to do publishable research. They can definitely do the work of the level of REU, and even some works for first or second year graduate students. My naive expectation is that, until 2030, they will be able to produce level of the research works of a PhD student's thesis.
If you are working on a problem that interests you, and you randomly type the problem to these $200 LLMs, and get complete proofs in one hour. This doesn't sound good, but this is definitely something happening now, or in a near future.

For example, I participated in the FrontierMath Symposium, which held in Berkeley and I was the only graduate students there (I think the only reason I got in is because I'm at Berkeley). That was the moment when I first used payed/expensive/not-affordable-for-me version of ChatGPT, i.e. `o3` and `o4-mini`. As others, I didn't use ChatGPT for my research at the time, only for improving grammars of my papers. During the symposium, about 35 mathematicians (mostly professors and postdocs) brought one or two "research-level" problems with concrete answers (that can be checked automatically), to design the hardest math benchmark at the time. And we all found that many of them can be solved with these smart versions of ChatGPT in 15 minutes, which we didn't expect much. Since we wanted total 50 problems, we had to make new, harder problems, and eventually we get to 50. Now, the [dashboard](https://epoch.ai/frontiermath/tiers-1-4) shows that `GPT5.2-Pro` achieved 31.3\% accuacy on the dataset, roughtly 14 problems. Since I didn't believe the announcement of `o3`'s performance over 20\% accuary on Tier 1-3 benchmark (on May 2025, if I remember correctly), getting any single problem correctly was surprising for me, in 2025. Now it is March 2026, and I'm not surprised by this 31.3\% accuracy that much.

Although this is a research-level benchmark, it is a benchmark anyway. These AI's might not smart enought to do "actual research", which you might think. Although I don't know how to define "actual research", I can definitely say that the frontier models are now smart enough to prove new theorems that can be published as a paper. There are too many examples and I have no enough margin to list them all, so I'd again recomment to search the above `awesome-ai-for-math` repository and search yourself.

Now you may ask: I'm also using ChatGPT, and *my* ChatGPT cannot figure out which one is bigger --- 9.9 or 9.11 --- or cannot count the number of `r`s in `strawberry`. Then how is it possible for it to do research math? First of all, there's a fairly large gap between $0 versions and $200 versions of these LLMs (which is, IMO, quite unfortunate). In particular, most of the recent works on using LLM to do research mathe are with ChatGPT **Pro** or Gemini **Deep Think** (or other frontier AI with fancier adjectives). Some of them are not even publicly available - smarter internal models that only employers can use. I'm definitly not recommending you to pay $200 per months, but at least, I'd ask you to ask some people around yourself who have access to these models to ask your own questions. For example, one of my friends asked me to query a question on constructing some real-valued function on a finite group, and one of these frontier LLMs managed to give a nice construction, and he was happy with that (I guess). Another thing to say is that, these models seems getting better as you ask more questions on similar topics, probably because the records are saved and re-used.

Another possible question is *how* these models can be smarter than us. Here's my own way of understanding. Basically, assume that these LLMs are trained over every single texts on the internet, including all the arXiv papers and published papers until some date. The original GPT (Generative Pretrained Transformers) uses autoregressive language modeling, which is a way of learning distribution of natural language by predicting next tokens (words) from a given subtext. Current LLMs are trained with much more sophisticated algorithms (something like RL, but probably more - I have not followed NLP research trends for a while and have no idea how the frontier models are pre or post-trained these days), and they are very good at retriving information. Roughly, you may assume that it "knows" all the mathematical knowledge available on the internet. Considering that the average graduate students are specialized in certain area, these LLMs are better than the students as it "knows" all the first-year graduate student level knowledge in every subjects of mathematics. However, this doesn't directly imply that they can do research, or more generally "reason" (or "think"), since one need to understand how to apply the known theorems to get your own results. This is the part where past LLMs weren't good at, but the current LLMs are getting better and better. In particular, if you are a graduate students who studied *all* areas of mathematics up to graduate student level (let's say, you read all the Springer GTM), then there's a chance where it can prove a theorem in area A using methods in area B that doesn't look directly related. Such amusing proofs won't happen occasionally in mathematics, but well-reasoning LLMs may have such possibilities since it knows a lot of mathematics. Of course, it is a nontrivial problem to make them "think", where many big tech companies pouring money to solve it and try to make so-called *AGI* (personally, I don't like this word). But anyway, think them as a smart and hard working graduate student who read all the GTM, then it might be less surprising that ChatGPT5.2-Pro achieved over 30\% accuracy on FrontierMath Tier 4 dataset, or Aletheia can wrote a paper in hardcore representation theory with almost no human interventions.

The last thing I want to mention is that LLMs are NOT the only way to do interesting things in mathematics. The good examples include AlphaEvolve, PatternBoost, or variants of them, which are deep learning models for "mathematical discoveries". Although some of them (e.g. AlphaEvolve) are back-uped by LLM (e.g. Gemini), most of them can work without LLMs and still can be used to find some nice or rare examples in mathematics. In particular, these examples may give you new mathematical insights and lead you to prove novel theorem (at least make new conjectures). Sometimes, you don't even need neural networks or transformers - there are many works that only uses classical machine learning algorithms to discover new mathematical phenomena. Such experiments can be done in 10 seconds with your laptop, and I believe there's a lot of possible directions you can pursue to find something intersting with these classical but powerful tools (Oldies are Goodies).

## Formal mathematics

Now, let's talk about formalization, in particular Lean (I don't know much about Isabelle/HOL/Rocq/other languages). Many people are started to getting interested in Lean, which is a great language that can verify your proof. Let me not say about why it is important (there are other better resources to find why), but more about *how* it would change, especially for the people who haven't used it much.

Formalzing a famous/hard/interesting theorem is important. Few years ago when there were no Claude or Codex or Cursor or Copliot, people did it manually and it was a very time-consuming job. You need to find all the definitions and theorems manually in `mathlib`, and need to figure out how to apply them in your project. 
But in 2026, you have all these fancy AI coding agents that write codes *very* well, and in particular, some of these are also good at writing Lean codes. It is even possible to finish whole (small) project on formalizing a theorem soley with these *general* coding agents, which are not specific to Lean at all. But in 2026, it scales further if you develop Lean-specific coding agents. For example, [Math Inc.](https://www.math.inc/) and maintainers of the [Sphere Packing in Lean project](https://github.com/thefundamentaltheor3m/Sphere-Packing-Lean) recently announced that Gauss, the special AI for Lean, was able to write `sorry`-free proof for both of the 8 and 24 dimensional sphere packing (which were "informally" proved by Viazovska and Cohn-Kumar-Radchenko-Miller-Viazovska, and yields Fields medal to Maryna in 2022). This is the largest scale ever for the autoformalization.

If you just started to learn Lean (possibly starting with [Natural Number Game](https://adam.math.hhu.de/#/g/leanprover-community/nng4)), you will shortly find out that the coding agents (general or Lean-specific) are much better than yourself on writing proofs. And I think it is a legit question to ask - if AI can do all of these, what is a point of learning how to Lean in 2026?
In particular, if you are only interested in formalizing your own informal proof in Lean and be convinced that you didn't do anything wrong (or actually find something wrong in the proof - that could be more valuable outcome in some sense), you may not need care about the actual Lean codes. And I think most of the mathematicians belong to this case.

First of all, it is not just about writing Lean code that compiles. Another important part of building `mathlib` is literally as "Library", and we want to re-use them for other purposes (we are not writing a book that no one would read it). For the purpose, one needs general-purpose and maintainable Lean codes, not just specialized and hard-to-read ones. Most of this can be done with the above coding agents and small amount of efforts - they can golf proofs easily. But still, it is a role of human to give a right task to AI to improve the codes.

Maybe you are not interested in contributing `mathlib` and `sorry`-free proofs are enough. Still, I think you need to learn how to Lean, and probably you should, at least, how to *read* Lean codes and *write definitions or statements*. If proof compiles, then there's no problem - you have a working formalization. But for the *statements* and *definitions*, there's no *verified* way to check that it is correct, or equivalent to what you intended. Human still needs to be in this loop to verify the formalization of definitions and statements, and quite often, we miss some small edge cases that might make your Lean statement as unprovable or not the same as your informal statement. In particular, there would be a huge chance of doing things wrong if you are autoformalizing proofs that you don't understand what's going on - there are some cases where people claiming that they proved novel things *and* formalized it, where the actual formalization does not corresponds to what they actually claims (and they don't know about this) .
Also, for the "proofs", there's no way to check whether a formalized proof align with informal proof. Maybe AI found a worse way to formalize, or better way, and produce `sorry`-free proof your theorem, but could be different from the actual proof. (I think it is a nontrivial question to ask whether two proofs are the same or not.) But you can definitely use AI to get help for this, e.g. asking Claude to summarize key ideas of 3M lines of Lean code, figure out key theorems and implication graphs, and compare with informal proofs you have.

## Conclusion

Recently, I read a book called *먼저 온 미래 (the future arrived early)* by 장강명 (which is in Korean). This book explains the current state of AI, in terms of Go (AlphaGo and post-AlphaGo moments). In partcular, I learned from the book that most of the Go players are now using AI for training, and it became impossible to win the game without using it. Also, the current best player in the world, Jinseo Shin, is very well-adapted to the use of AI.

I think the story also applies to the mathematics, especially for the ones like me who are not mature enough to be called as a "professional mathematician". It is very hard to expect that this flow of AI for mathematics will change or deprecated; more and more people will start to use AI (but in various ways, not just typing "hey prove this for me and get me PhD, thanks"). One thing slightly unfortunate is that, expensive models are noticably better than free models, and people who are using the former would have better performance than latter. But anyway, we need to figure out what would be the best way to use these as tools or research assistants, rather than competitors for humans.
I use ChatGPT (Pro) almost everyday for literature search, to make sure that I'm not trying to re-prove something that already proved in the past (but the paper may written in Russian or Chinese so I cannot read, but ChatGPT can do). I also ask some questions related to my work, mostly for the lemmas that I know how to do, but I don't want to spend much time on it. But until now, I didn't use these much to ask the questions that I'm really interested in and want to answer myself - since I need more training to be a better and solid mathematician. 

Things changes extremely fast, and I cannot track all these updates. Maybe, I may change my mind next months or even tomorrow. At least, I'd have more to say next year. *I'll write a second version of the post in 2027 (as a postdoc), and third version of the post when I get another job (I have no idea if this will happen soon - probably never happen)*. Let me set a Google calender for this.
